# Collective behavior of stock prices in the time of crisis as a response to the external stimulus
In this repository, I look for the interaction between stock prices of 27 big US companies using correlation and Granger causality matrices. I found that the pair-wise Granger causality interaction between prices in the times of crisis is increasing, and conclude that would be the consequence of simultaneous response of the markets to the outside events or external stimulus that is considered as a common driver to all the stocks, not a result of real causal predictability between the prices themselves. I modelled, the observed patterns in the price of by adding a multiplicative exogenous term as the representative for external factors to the geometric Brownian motion model for stock prices. Altogether, I can detect and model the effects of the Great Recession as a consequence of the mortgage crisis in 2007/2008 as well as the impacts of the Covid out-break in early 2020.

# Granger causality test between stock prices of companies
Granger causality (GC) is a statistical method, introduced for the first time in the field of econometrics [1,2], to study the causal interaction between two or multiple time series. E.g. in the case of two time series, GC quantifies whether one series helps forecasting the other. The method is based on two main premises, namely (i) cause happens before its effect and (ii) observing the cause can improve the predictability of its effect. Consider two time series, xt and yt, recorded simulataneously. The series xt Granger causes yt if xt contains some information which can be used for improving the forecast accuracy of yt, alongside the past values of yt itself. Granger causality is thus a measure of predictability, allowing the evaluation of the usefulness of one time-series in forecasting another.
